# Contributor's Guide

The wgpu-py project is a community effort, shaped by a group of contributors from around the
world. And you can contribute too!


## Creating issues, pull-requests, and discussions

We coordinate our work using GitHub,

* The [issues](https://github.com/pygfx/wgpu-py/issues) are meant to track problems and feature requests.
* The [pull-requests](https://github.com/pygfx/wgpu-py/pulls) (a.k.a. PR's) are used to contribute new code to the project.
* The [discussions](https://github.com/pygfx/wgpu-py/discussions) are to ask questions and have discussions related to (using) the project.

Before creating a new issues, please first search the issue list to see if your problem is
already known. If it is, you can then participate by letting us know you encountered the
same problem, and maybe add specific details that can help us fix the problem.

If you're new to Github, see Github's documentation for
[creating an issue](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/managing-your-work-on-github/creating-an-issue)
and [creating a pull-request](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-github/github-flow).
And we are also here to help you!


## How can I contribute?

### Reporting problems

If you run into a difficulty when using wgpu-py, we'd like to know, so that we can
fix or document it. If you encounter what you think is a bug, please let us
know by creating an issue! Likewise in case things are unclear, e.g. because the documentation is incomplete or
outdated.

### Asking questions

If you are trying to achieve something and you're not sure how to do this with wgpu-py, you
can start a discussion. We can then give some tips, and others with similar
goals can benefit too.

### Requesting and contributing features

If you feel that something is missing, you can create an issue to request that
feature. We especially appreciate if you're willing to contribute the new
feature via a pull-request. It can be good to first open an issue (especially
for large/complex features) to discuss the approach and design. This
increases the chance of a successful pull-request.

### Promoting wgpu-py

We love it when wgpu-py is used in a derived project, blog posts, article, or scientific paper.
We love it even more if it is referenced to help increase the visibility of the project.
Also feel free to reach out to let us know!
See our Zenodo page for citation details: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18836262

### Active contributions

If you just want to help move the project forward, we welcome you to:

* Check the issue list, to see if there are issues that you can help with, maybe by fixing a bug or contributing a new feature.
* Check the pull-requests, to see if you can help review it, or maybe test it out.
* Check the discussions, to see if you can help answer user questions.
* Read the documentation, and see if it can be improved.


## AI Policy

*This policy was gratefully inspired by the AI policies of SciPy and scikit-image.*

We are a small developer team, and we enjoy reviewing and discussing code
written by other humans. We recognize that LLMs may be useful, but overall
prefer for contributions to be hand-written.

### Responsibility

You are responsible for all the code that you contribute, including the AI
generated code. You must understand and be able to explain the submitted code as
well as its relation with the surrounding code. It is not acceptable to submit a
patch that you cannot understand and explain yourself.

### Disclosure

You must disclose whether AI has been used to produce any code of your
pull-request. If so, you must document which tool(s) have been used, how they
were used, and specify what code or text is AI generated.

### Copyright

Contributors must own the copyright of any code submitted to wgpu-py. Code
generated by AI may infringe on copyright and it is your responsibility to not
infringe. We reserve the right to reject any pull requests where the copyright
is in question.

### Communication

When interacting with developers (in discussions, issues, pull-requests,
etc.) do not use AI to speak for you, except for translation or grammar editing.
Human-to-human communication is essential for an open source community to
thrive.

### AI Agents

The use of an AI agent that writes code and then submits a pull request
autonomously is not permitted.


## Coding Style

The wgpu-py project uses `ruff` to format and lint the code:

```bash
# Reformat the code if necessary
ruff format
# Check for linting errors.
ruff check
```

Optionally, if you install [pre-commit](https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit/) hooks with `pre-commit install`, lint fixes and formatting will be automatically applied on `git commit`.


## Code generation, and updating to a later version of WebGPU or wgpu-native

To update to upstream changes, we use a combination of automatic code
generation and manual updating. See [the codegen utility](codegen/README.md)
for more information.


## Testing

The test suite is divided into multiple parts:

* `pytest -v tests` runs the unit tests.
* `pytest -v examples` tests the examples.
* `pytest -v wgpu/__pyinstaller` tests if wgpu is properly supported by pyinstaller.
* `pytest -v codegen` tests the code that autogenerates the API.
* `pytest -v tests_mem` tests against memoryleaks.

There are two types of tests for examples included:

### Type 1: Checking if examples can run

When running the test suite, pytest will run every example in a subprocess, to
see if it can run and exit cleanly. You can opt out of this mechanism by
including the comment `# run_example = false` in the module.

### Type 2: Checking if examples output an image

You can also (independently) opt-in to output testing for examples, by including
the comment `# test_example = true` in the module. Output testing means the test
suite will attempt to import the `canvas` instance global from your example, and
call it to see if an image is produced.

To support this type of testing, ensure the following requirements are met:

* The `RenderCanvas` class is imported from the `rendercanvas.auto` module.
* The `canvas` instance is exposed as a global in the module.
* A rendering callback has been registered with `canvas.request_draw(fn)`.

Reference screenshots are stored in the `examples/screenshots` folder, the test
suite will compare the rendered image with the reference.

Note: this step will be skipped when not running on CI. Since images will have
subtle differences depending on the system on which they are rendered, that
would make the tests unreliable.

For every test that fails on screenshot verification, diffs will be generated
for the rgb and alpha channels and made available in the
`examples/screenshots/diffs` folder. On CI, the `examples/screenshots` folder
will be published as a build artifact so you can download and inspect the
differences.

If you want to update the reference screenshot for a given example, you can grab
those from the build artifacts as well and commit them to your branch.

### Testing Locally

Testing locally is possible, however pixel perfect results will differ from
those on the CIs due to discrepancies in hardware, and driver (we use llvmpipe)
versions.

On linux, it is possible to force the usage of LLVMPIPE in the test suite
and compare the generated results of screenshots. Beware, the results on your machine
may differ to those on the CI. We always include the CI screenshots in the test suite
to improve the repeatability of the tests.

If you have access to a linux machine with llvmpipe installed, you may run the
example pixel comparison testing by setting the WGPUPY_WGPU_ADAPTER_NAME
environment variable appropriately. For example


```
WGPUPY_WGPU_ADAPTER_NAME=llvmpipe pytest -v examples/
```

The `WGPUPY_WGPU_ADAPTER_NAME` variable is modeled after the
https://github.com/gfx-rs/wgpu?tab=readme-ov-file#environment-variables
and should only be used for testing the wgpu-py library itself.
It is not part of the supported wgpu-py interface.

